---
layout:     post
title:      Apereo CAS - CAPTCHA Activation Strategies
summary:    Configure Apereo CAS to integrate with CAPTCHA using implementations such as Google's reCAPTCHA, while taking into account specific application policies when it comes to activating reCAPTCHA.
tags:       ["CAS 6.5.x", "Google reCAPTCHA"]
---

The CAPTCHA widgets can protect your Apereo CAS deployment from bots, spam, and other forms of automated abuse. In this tutorial, we will briefly review the configuration steps required to turn on a CAPTCHA integration backed by Google reCAPTCHA, and we will also take a look different ways to activate CAPTCHA per applications and dedicated policies.

{% include googlead1.html %}

Our starting position is as follows:

- CAS `6.5.x`
- Java `11`
- [CAS WAR Overlay](https://github.com/apereo/cas-overlay-template)

## Google reCAPTCHA

Once the [required extension module](https://apereo.github.io/cas/6.4.x/integration/Configuring-Google-reCAPTCHA.html) is included in the [CAS WAR Overlay](https://github.com/apereo/cas-overlay-template), the following settings are required to make the integration work:

```properties
cas.google-recaptcha.site-key=...
cas.google-recaptcha.secret=...

cas.google-recaptcha.verify-url=https://www.google.com/recaptcha/api/siteverify
cas.google-recaptcha.version=GOOGLE_RECAPTCHA_V2
cas.google-recaptcha.enabled=true
```
{% include googlead1.html %}

The `site-key` and the `secret` are settings that should be given to you by Google. All other HTML/Javascript changes are automatically handled and provided by CAS. With such settings configured, you should be able to see the following when you next deploy and run CAS:

{% include image.html img="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1205228/107344365-9a0d2e00-6ad7-11eb-914e-da6683d5fc85.png" 
width="80%" title="Apereo CAS with Google reCAPTCHA" %}

Note that the above settings enable Google reCAPTCHA `v2`. Support for [Google reCAPTCHA v3](https://developers.google.com/recaptcha/docs/v3) is also available if you were to switch the version to use `GOOGLE_RECAPTCHA_V3` instead.

## Application Policies

The previous configuration does not specify any particular rules and conditions for CAPTCHA activation, which means by default all requests qualify and must pass through CAPTCHA. It is of course possible to exclude certain applications from CAPTCHA activation and validation rules, or disable CAPTCHA globally and only enforce validation rules for specific eligible applications. 

{% include googlead1.html %}

<div class="alert alert-info">
  <strong>Note</strong><br/>Remember all such policies may apply to all application types regardless of the authentication protocol, and they equally apply to all other CAPTCHA implementations such as hCAPTCHA.
</div>

Let's consider a scenario where we would disable CAPTCHA globally first:

```properties
cas.google-recaptcha.enabled=false
```

...and instead, we design a policy such that all applications whose request URL begins with `https://secure` would be asked to pass through CAPTCHA:

```json
{
  "@class" : "org.apereo.cas.services.RegexRegisteredService",
  "serviceId" : "^https://secure.+",
  "name" : "Service",
  "id" : 1,
  "properties" : {
    "@class" : "java.util.HashMap",
    "captchaEnabled" : {
      "@class" : "org.apereo.cas.services.DefaultRegisteredServiceProperty",
      "values" : [ "java.util.HashSet", [ "true" ] ]
    }
  }
}
```

We could also take this one step further and narrow down the list of qualifying applications to those requests where the client remote IP address matches a specific regular expression pattern. For example, a practica use case might be that CAPTCHA should not be activated if the user is on a trusted private network or VPN:
{% include googlead1.html %}
```json
{
  "@class" : "org.apereo.cas.services.RegexRegisteredService",
  "serviceId" : "^https://secure.+",
  "name" : "Service",
  "id" : 1,
  "properties" : {
    "@class" : "java.util.HashMap",
    "captchaEnabled" : {
      "@class" : "org.apereo.cas.services.DefaultRegisteredServiceProperty",
      "values" : [ "java.util.HashSet", [ "true" ] ]
    },
    "captchaIPAddressPattern" : {
      "@class" : "org.apereo.cas.services.DefaultRegisteredServiceProperty",
      "values" : [ "java.util.HashSet", [ "192.168.+", "5.33.+" ] ]
    }
  }
}
```

# Need Help?

If you have questions about the contents and the topic of this blog post, or if you need additional guidance and support, feel free to [send us a note ](/#contact-section-header) and ask about consulting and support services.

# So...

I hope this review was of some help to you and I am sure that both this post as well as the functionality it attempts to explain can be improved in any number of ways. Please feel free to [engage and contribute][contribguide] as best as you can.

Happy Coding,

[Misagh Moayyed](https://fawnoos.com)

[contribguide]: https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Contributor-Guidelines.html
